V2 dev cmorizer docu (#1146)
ESMValGroup/ESMValTool: doc/sphinx/source/esmvaldiag/observations.rst

************************************************************
Contributing a CMORizing script for an observational dataset
************************************************************

ESMValTool is able to process observational data sets, however, since many
features of this version are based on the `Iris library 
<https://scitools.org.uk/iris/docs/latest/>`_ that uses the `CF conventions
<http://cfconventions.org/>`_, the format of the data sets has to follow very
strict CMOR rules. If the original observational data set is not in the right
CMOR format, it has to be CMORized before the ESMValTool preprocessor can
work with it. The following steps are necessary to prepare an observational
data set for the use in ESMValTool.

| `1. Check if your variable is CMOR standard`_
| `2. Edit your configuration file`_
| `3. Store your dataset in the right place`_
| `4. Create a cmorizer for the dataset`_
| `5. Run the cmorizing script`_
| `6. Naming convention of the observational data files`_
| `7. Test the cmorized dataset`_

1. Check if your variable is CMOR standard
==========================================

Most variables are defined in the CMIP data request and can be found in the

> CMOR tables in the folder ``/esmvalcore/cmor/tables/cmip5/Tables/``,

Reviewer: Note that this will be moved to the ESMValTool Core repostitory, a link there might be nice. It would also be good to mention that this is just a copy of the PCMDI repo

Author: I added the link to the ESMValTool Core repository and also added a sentence about PCMDI.

  <https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/blob/version2_development/esmvaltool/utils/cmorizers/obs/cmorize_obs_ERA-Interim.ncl>`_;
- **Note:** the fields ``VAR``, ``NAME``, ``MIP`` and ``FREQ`` all ask for one
  or more entries. If more than one entry is provided, make sure that the order
  of the entries is the same for all four fields! (for example, that the first
  entry in all four fields describe the variable ``xch4`` that you would like
  to extract);
- **Note:** some functions in the script are NCL-specific and are available
  through the loading of the script ``interface.ncl``. There are similar
  functions available for python scripts.

In the second part of the script each variable defined in ``VAR`` is separately
extracted from the original data file and processed. Most parts of the code are
commented, and therefore it should be easy to follow what is happening. This
example coded in NCL, since many cmorizing scripts that are available so far
are written in NCL, and adapting existing code and using existing libraries is
easier than writing something totally new. However, in theory this script could

> also be written in Python but without the help of the Iris package and rather

Reviewer: This is probably not correct, many of the current cmorization scripts written in Python use iris. Also, I think it would be better to explain a Python example before the NCL example, because NCL is end of life so new cmorizers should preferably be written in Python.

Author: I worked a bit on Section 4 now: I rearranged a few things and I created two subsections, one for an example written in python (which I added), and one for the example in NCL.
@schlunma: could you check if I described the python example correctly, please?

where solutions to many kinds of format issues with observational data are
addressed. Most of these scripts are written in NCL at the moment, but more 
and more examples for Python-based cmorizing scripts become available.

How much cmorizing an observational data set needs is strongly dependent on
the original NetCDF file and how close the original formatting already is to
the strict CMOR standard. 

In the following two subsections two cmorizing scripts, one written in python and
one written in NCL, are explained in more detail.

4.1 Cmorizer script written in python
*************************************

Find here an example of a cmorizing script, written for the ``MTE`` dataset
that is available at the MPI for Biogeochemistry in Jena: `cmorize_obs_mte.py
<https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/blob/version2_development/esmvaltool/cmorizers/obs/cmorize_obs_mte.py>`_.

All the necessary information about the dataset to write the filename correctly, 
and which variable is of interest, is stored in a seperate configuration file: `MTE.yml
<https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/blob/version2_development/esmvaltool/cmorizers/obs/cmor_config/MTE.yml>`_.

> 

Reviewer 2: Add

```rst
in the directory ``ESMValTool/esmvaltool/cmorizers/obs/cmor_config/``. Note that the name of this configuration file has to be identical to the name of your data set. 
```

Author: Done!

The first part of this configuration file defines the filename of the raw
observations file, the second part defines the common global attributes for 
the cmorizer output, e.g. information that is needed to piece together the 
final observations file name in the correct structure (see Section 6). The 
third part defines the variables that are supposed to be cmorized.

The actual cmorizing script ``cmorize_obs_mte.py`` consists of a header with
information on where and how to download the data, noting the last access of the

> data webpage, and who has written the cmorizing script. 

Reviewer 2: It's not necessary to add the name of the author, `git blame` will do that :grin:

Reviewer 3: That's a remnant of v1, when we used to document the history in the header.
We still do that in the NCL and R routines, but as you say, since we use git we could get rid of that at some point.

Author: I took out the last part of the sentence.

> After the header there is a section where different procedures and functions

Reviewer 2: I would replace this and the next paragraph by something like this (it's not important to explain every detail of this specific CMORizer but to focus on the necessary elements):

```rst
The main body of the CMORizer script must contain a function called

.. code-block:: python

   def cmorization(in_dir, out_dir, cfg):

with this exact call signature. Here, ``in_dir`` corresponds to the input directory of the raw files,
``out_dir`` to the output directory of final reformatted data set and ``cfg`` to the configuration
dictionary given by the  ``.yml`` configuration file. This function needs to return ``None``. All the
work, i.e. loading of the raw files, processing them and saving the final output, has to be
performed inside its body. To simplify this process, ESMValTool provides a set of predefined utilities_,
which can be imported into your CMORizer by

.. code-block:: python

   from . import utilities as utils

Apart from a function to easily save data, this module contains different kinds of small fixes
to the data attributes, coordinates, and metadata which are necessary for the data field to be
CMOR-compliant.

Note that this specific CMORizer script contains several subroutines in order to make the code more clearer
and readable (we strongly recommend to follow that code style). For example, the function
``_get_filepath`` converts the raw filepath to the correct one and the function ``_extract_variable``
extracts and saves a single variable from the raw data.

.. _utilities: https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/blob/version2_development/esmvaltool/cmorizers/obs/utilities.py
```

Author: Done!

************************************************************
Contributing a CMORizing script for an observational dataset
************************************************************

> ESMValTool is able to process observational data sets, however, since many

Reviewer 3: This paragraph is confusing CF and CMOR. 
I would simply write that the ESMValTool is designed to work with CF compliant data and follows the CMOR tables from the CMIP data request, therefore the observational datasets need to be CMORized for usage in ESMValTool.

Author: I changed the wording.

features of this version are based on the `Iris library 
<https://scitools.org.uk/iris/docs/latest/>`_ that uses the `CF conventions
<http://cfconventions.org/>`_, the format of the data sets has to follow very
strict CMOR rules. If the original observational data set is not in the right
CMOR format, it has to be CMORized before the ESMValTool preprocessor can
work with it. The following steps are necessary to prepare an observational
data set for the use in ESMValTool.

| `1. Check if your variable is CMOR standard`_

> | `2. Configuration file`_

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `2. Edit your configuration file`_
```

| `3. Store your dataset in the right place`_

> | `4. Reformat your data set to meet CMOR standard - script`_

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `4. Create a cmorizer for the dataset`_
```

| `5. Run the cmorizing script`_
| `6. Naming convention of the observational data files`_

> | `7. Running a preprocessing test recipe`_

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `7. Test the cmorized dataset`_
```

1. Check if your variable is CMOR standard
==========================================

> Some variables are defined as CMOR standard. You can find several files with

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Most variables are defined in the CMIP data request and can be found in the
```

CMOR tables in the folder ``/esmvalcore/cmor/tables/cmip5/Tables/``,
differentiated according to the ``MIP`` they belong to. If you find the

> variable in one of these files, you do not have to do anything further. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
variable in one of these tables, you can proceed to the next point.
```

> If your variable is somehow more specific than the entries in the tables

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If your variable is not available in the standard CMOR tables
```

> (e.g. your variable is called ``bihemispherical directional albedo`` and in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> the table only ``albedo`` is available), please write your own custom

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
you need to write a custom CMOR table for the variable
```

> variable information as outlined below. If you do not find your variable

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
as outlined below.
```

> here, you have to provide the variable information in an additional file

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> that will have to be placed in he folder ``/esmvalcore/cmor/tables/custom/``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> The file that you have to create for a custom variable needs to follow these

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To create a new custom CMOR table you need to follow these
```

guidelines:

- Provide information about the SOURCE (for all observations and reanalysis it
  was decided by the ESMValTool development team that this is set to ``CMIP5``;
  it basically describes the framework in which the individual variables are
  associated with realms; it might not be necessary to provide this information
  here, but before we know for sure that we can leave it out, please just

>   provide it);

Reviewer 3: Actually this can be left out.

Author: You mean the information abour the SOURCE?

Reviewer 3: Yes, or you can shorten it.

Author: I removed the section about the SOURCE.

- Provide the ``variable_entry``;
- Provide the ``modeling_realm``;

> - Provide the variable attributes, but **do not** provide a standard name! The

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Provide the variable attributes, but leave `standard_name` blank.
```

>   custom variables will only be read by Iris if this information is not

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

>   provided! Necessary variable attributes are: ``units``, ``cell_methods``,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

>   provided! Necessary variable attributes are: ``units``, ``cell_methods``,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Necessary variable attributes are: ``units``, ``cell_methods``,
```

>   ``cell_measures``, ``long_name``, ``comment``.  

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

- Provide some additional variable attributes. Necessary additional variable
  attributes are: ``dimensions``, ``out_name``, ``type``. There are also
  additional variable attributes that can be defined here (see the already

>   available cmorizers). 

Reviewer 3: Which additional attributes?

Author: I meant here additional attributes listed in the paragraph (e.g. "dimensions").

> Use the file structure as given in the files that already exist, and save the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is recommended to use an existing custom table as a template, to edit the content and save it as
```

> file with the extension ``<short_name>.dat``.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
``<short_name>.dat``.
```

> 2. Configuration file

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Add the paths to your configuration file
```

=====================

It is important to have your configuration file defined correctly, to be sure
that your data files are found by the ESMValTool, and that the cmorized data
files are written in the correct folders. See Section **link to be added** for
an example of a configuration file, that has to be filled out with the paths

> information of your specific machine.

Reviewer 3: I would shorten this:
```
Make sure that the path to raw observational data to be cmorized (``RAWOBS``) is present in your configuration file.

Author: Fine with me.

Author: I adjusted it a little.

3. Store your dataset in the right place
========================================

For the ESMValTool to find the data set that it needs, a specific folder
structure is defined. You have your path that points towards the
observations. That path is defined in your configuration file (see Section 2)
under ``RAWOBS``. From there you need the subdirectories ``Tier1``, ``Tier2``
and ``Tier3``. In the folder of your choice, you need a folder with the name of
the dataset, and in that folder you put the data files with the raw
observations (as you can download them from the observations data source

> webpage).

Reviewer 3: This can be shortened and merged with 2. Just mention that subdirectories with Tier2 and Tier3 have to be created.

Author: I adjusted it.

> 4. Reformat your data set to meet CMOR standard - script

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Create a cmorizer for the dataset
```

========================================================

To make sure that your dataset is in the correct format for Iris to work with
it, you most likely will have to process it with a cmorizing script. In the
rare, but possible, case that your dataset is in the correct format already, it
is advisable to run it through a cmorizing script anyway, to be sure the file

> name is correctly defined for the ESMValTool to find the file. 

Reviewer 3: This paragraph can be removed.

Author: I removed the paragraph.

> 

Reviewer 3: The rest of this section is far too detailed in my opinion. 
I would simply write that a cmorizer script can be created following the existing examples, either Python or NCL.
Mention that utility functions for the cmorization are available in both languages (`utilities.ncl`, `utilities.py`). 
Please also add a Sphinx note to warn the user that Python should be preferred since NCL support will terminate soon.
```
.. note::
  Text here
```

Author: Ok, I shortened it a bit, and tried to add the Sphinx note. It does not show up properly yet, don't know why.

  is taken from the configuration file (see Section 2) that is necessary to run
  the cmorizing script, and the filename is put together from the
  information given in the first part of the script, following the rules for
  filenames so that the ESMValTool can read in the files. 

The script as it is detailed here would only be able to correct some minor
problems with the coordinates (e.g. latitudes in the wrong order, longitudes in
the wrong order, etc.). Everything else will have to be added to the script for
it to deal with it. There are many cmorizing scripts available in
`/esmvaltool/utils/cmorizers/obs/
<https://github.com/ESMValGroup/ESMValTool/blob/version2_development/esmvaltool/utils/cmorizers/obs/>`_
where solutions to many kinds of format issues with observational data are
addressed. Most of these scripts are written in NCL, but there more and more
examples for Python-based cmorizing scripts become available.

How much cmorizing an observational data set needs is strongly dependent on
the original NetCDF file and how close the original formatting already is to
the strict CMOR standard. 

5. Run the cmorizing script
===========================

> In order to actually run the cmrorizing script, you have to use the following statement:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The cmorizing script for the given dataset can be run with:
```

.. code-block:: console

 cmorize_obs -c <config-user.yml> -o <dataset-name>

> This call only works, of course, if you are already in the folder in which also

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> the ``config-user.yml`` is stored.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

.. note::

   The output path given in the configuration file is the path where
   your cmorized dataset will be stored. The ESMValTool will create a folder
   with the correct tier information (see Section 2) if that tier folder is not
   already available, and then a folder named after the data set. In this
   folder the cmorized data set will be stored as a netCDF file. 

> Your run was successful if a netCDF file was produced in your output directory,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Your run was successful if one or more NetCDF files are produced in your output directory,
```

> and if at some point the output on your screen shows an info line similar to

Reviewer 3: I would delete the remaining of this section.

Author: I removed the rest of the section.

this and no additional error message is shown (note: this is the example for
the example data set ``xch4``): 

.. code-block:: console

  INFO    Processing xch4 (Amon)

6. Naming convention of the observational data files
====================================================

For the ESMValTool to be able to read the observations from the NetCDF file,
the file name needs a very specific structure and order of information parts
(very similar to the naming convention for observations in ESMValTool
v1.0). The file name will be automatically correctly created if a cmorizing

> script has been used to create the netCDF file. If the file with the

Reviewer 3: I would delete the rest of the paragraph, from `If the file with...`.

Author: I removed the rest of the paragraph.

observations is already in the correct CMOR format, it is possible to use the
data set without using a cmorizing script. In this case it is important to
follow the guidelines below on how the filename should be structured.

> The file for the ``CDS-XCH4`` observations example in the correct format is

Reviewer 3: Here and below, I would define the general naming convention, as given in `config-developer.yml`, e.g.
```
'OBS_[dataset]_[type]_[version]_[mip]_[short_name]_YYYYMM-YYYYMM.nc'
```
and then explain the different keys in the list below.
You can then mention `OBS_CDS-XCH4_sat_L3_Amon_xch4_200301-201612.nc` as an example.

Author: I changed the text to show the general naming convention, and also show the example for CDS-XCH4.

  ``observations``; 
- CDS-XCH4: that is the name of the dataset. It has been named this way for
  illustration purposes (so that everybody understands it is the xch4 dataset
  downloaded from the CDS), but a better name would indeed be ``ESACCI-XCH4``
  since it is a ESA-CCI dataset; 
- sat: describes the source of the data, here we are looking at satellite data
  (therefore ``sat``), could also be ``reanaly`` for reanalyses;
- L3: describes the version of the dataset:
- Amon: is the information in which ``mip`` the variable is to be expected, and
  what kind of temporal resolution it has; here we expect ``xch4`` to be part
  of the atmosphere (``A``) and we have the dataset in a monthly resolution
  (``mon``);
- xch4: Is the name of the variable. Each observational data file is supposed
  to only include one variable per file; 
- 200301-201612: Is the period the dataset spans with ``200301`` being the
  start year and month, and ``201612`` being the end year and month;

.. note::
   There is a different naming convention for ``obs4mips`` data (see the exact
   specifications for the obs4mips data file naming convention in the
   ``config-developer.yml`` file).

> 7. Running a preprocessing test recipe

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
7. Test the cmorized dataset
```

======================================

To verify that the cmorized data file is indeed correctly formatted

> (following the strict CMOR standard Iris needs), it is good to run a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
, you can run a dedicated test recipe
```

> preprocessing test recipe, that does not include any diagnostic, but only reads

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
that does not include any diagnostic, but only reads
```

in the data file and has it processed in the preprocessor. Such a recipe is

> called ``recipes/examples/recipe_check_obs.yml``. It can be adjusted to only

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
called ``recipes/examples/recipe_check_obs.yml``. You just need to add a diagnostic
for your dataset following the existing entries. 
```

> define one preprocessor that is then called in the diagnostics part. **Note:**

Reviewer 3: Delete rest of the paragraph.

Author: I deleted the rest of the paragraph.

For the recipe to only run the preprocessor and no diagnostic analyses
whatsoever, make sure to set the "script" key in the diagnostics part to
"null".

If the recipe is adjusted as outlined above, run it with the following call:

.. code-block:: console

>   esmvaltool -c *name_of_your_configuration_file* recipes/examples/recipe_preprocessor_test.yml

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  esmvaltool -c <config-user.yml> examples/recipe_preprocessor_test.yml --diagnostics <dataset>
```

> This call only works, of course, if you are already in the folder in which also

Reviewer 3: Delete this paragraph.

Author: I deleted the paragraph.
